In this video, we're gonna learn about
different ways of aligning grid items to grid areas.
Now, before we start, let's actually
set this one here back to row,
okay, so that our grid items
are placed in rows rather than in columns, okay,
and so that the additional items
are then placed in the rows.
Also, let's add some spanning here
to two of these grid items, so that
I can better show you how this alignment
of grid items to grid areas works.
So let's do it here for number 4 and number 7,
and I do it just as I did before,
with the Sass way of creating the selectors,
so this here will mean item 4, right?
So let's give it a different background-color,
one called crimson, which is like pink, like this,
and let's say we want this one to start
on the grid row number 2, and then span
across three row tracks.
Okay, so just like this.
And you see that it also changed here
from the second column to the first column track,
and I'm actually not really sure why it did that,
but it has to do with the automatic placement algorithm.
Okay, so let's move on and do the same with number 7.
Also give it a background-color in this pink color as well,
and then say grid-column: 1 to -1, so all until the end.
All right, and so you see that then it placed
the last item here in yet another new created grid track.
So you see here, on the grid here in inspector,
that we now have actually four implicit grid tracks,
so this one, this, and this, so four implicit grid tracks
and two explicit grid tracks, right?
Remember that from the last lecture?
So this is how our grid looks like now.
Moving out a bit so you can see it.
Okay, so that's the way that it looks like right now.
And so now, let me actually show you
what I meant with aligning grid items to grid areas.
Okay, so basically, this is very similar
to what we can do in Flexbox with the align-items property.
And in fact, we have the exact same
property here with CSS Grid, so let me show it to you.
So, just like in Flexbox, we apply these properties
to the container, to the grid container,
which is this one here, of course.
So let's add align-items,
such as we have in Flexbox, once again.
Now, align-items is going to align the items
across the column axis, okay?
So let's set this to center, and let's see what happens.
All right, that's the result
of align-items setting to center.
And so that's what I meant with aligning
the grid item inside of an area.
So remember that this one here
what is orange is the grid item, of course,
and the content that's in the grid item,
and that is now aligned vertically in the center
of this grid area here, right, so this grid area,
which is here, delimited with these lines.
And the same, of course, applies here,
because this is now an entire grid area.
Remember here, because we spanned this element,
so this element number 4, we spanned it
across these three row tracks,
and so this is a grid area, right?
And so now this item here is vertically centered
inside of that grid area, okay?
Now, down here, you cannot really see a big difference,
because this grid item is actually
almost as tall as this track, okay?
So let's change that a bit, so decrease
the padding of all the items to 10,
and so now you'll see here that
it's also vertically centered here in this area,
right, so just as we have it here.
Now, why was it stretching all the way
from the top of the grid area, from here,
to the bottom of the grid area,
before we set this align-items property?
Well, it's because of the same reason
that it is in Flexbox, and that's because
align-items is, by default, set to stretch.
So let me show that to you.
So if you set it to stretch, well,
then the grid item stretches across the entire grid cell,
or grid area, in this case here.
So in this case here, it's a big area, and here as well.
So let me write that down here,
that the default is stretch.
But we can also set it to center, as I showed you,
and also to end, for example.
So center, end, and start.
So these are the ones that you need to know, okay?
These are the ones that are really important.
So now you see that each of these items
is actually aligned to the end, to the bottom,
of each of the grid cells, or grid areas.
Okay, so maybe right now you cannot really see
a big use-case for this,
or why this is really helpful or useful,
but you'll see that with practice,
this will make a lot of sense, and actually,
in the big project that we're gonna code up next,
we will actually use these properties
to achieve some of the layouts
that we're looking for, that we want.
Okay, so that is align-items.
Now, we also have something else
that we don't have in Flexbox,
which is called justify-items, so justify-items.
And we don't have this in Flexbox
because Flexbox, it's not a two-dimensional
layout system like the grid, okay?
So we have align-items that aligns the items
across the column axis, which means vertically,
and then we have justify-items, which aligns the items
across the row axis, or horizontally.
So let me show that to you with center,
and let's put center here as well,
and all right, so now with this,
the item is actually completely centered
inside of the grid cell, or the grid area,
both vertically and horizontally.
So with align-items, we align the items vertically,
and with justify-items, we align them horizontally.
Okay, does that make sense?
And again, not only in the cells, but also in entire areas.
So remember, this one here is an entire area,
and let's zoom out a bit here, actually.
So these three cells here, they form an entire area, right,
and so now this item here, which has Flexbox,
this is centered vertically and horizontally
in that entire area, right?
So remember, it's an area because we set it here
to span across these three grid tracks, okay?
And then the same, of course, here with number 7.
So this entire thing here, these two cells,
they form an area, these two,
and so now this small item here,
which says "is", is horizontally and vertically
centered inside of it.
Okay, so let's put it back to the original size
and then, just as before, so, where is it?
The default here is, of course, stretch,
and I'm not gonna write it down,
because it's actually the same as here.
So let's put it to start, for example,
and that's not right.
So start, and now what it's going to do
is that it aligns them here all the way to the left side.
Of course, I could put end, and then
it comes here to the right side,
to the end of the grid area.
So you can play around with this,
but I hope it made a lot of sense like this to you.
So let's set it back to center here, and yeah.
Now, as in Flexbox, where you have the align-self property
to basically override the align-items property
for one individual item, we have the same here in Grid.
So we have align-self and also justify-self.
So let me show that to you here with the number 4.
And let's set this one here to align-self.
And so what this is gonna do, instead,
it will basically override the align-items property
that is on the grid container.
So if we set this one here to start,
then only this item here will move to the top, hopefully.
And, well, it did not.
Maybe there's some, I see there's some error somewhere,
so let's check that out.
Well, it says there's some kind of error,
but there's actually not.
Let's just delete all of this
and let's try it again.
Align-self, and start.
And so this should work, and yeah, so now it works.
And so you now you see that it's
vertically aligned all the way
to the top of the grid area.
And I could say end, and then it will
move down to the bottom of the area, okay?
So just like this, but let me put it back to start
as it moves to the top, and now we have
the same for the justify.
So we can say justify-self, and then
we have the exact same options here.
So let's say start, and so it's gonna move
right here to this position, okay?
So just like Flexbox, here the self property
overrides the overall setting
which is set on the container.
In Flexbox, we only have align-self because, again,
it's just a one-dimensional layout system,
but here in Grid, we have align-self
and then justify-self for the horizontal direction.
Okay, and that is how we align
grid items to grid areas
both horizontally and vertically.
Now, if you want to learn how to align entire tracks
to the grid container, well, then just move on with me
right to the next lecture.